Touhou Project 1❾⑨
More than an Introduction
Brian Lee, Yuchen Liu, James Toth
Con Ja Nai XXV.S
April 13th, 2019
Based off Reimu Hakurei

“The Touhou Project is a series of 2D vertically-scrolling danmaku shooting games made by Team Shanghai Alice, with six fighting game spinoffs co-produced with Twilight Frontier.”
-Touhou Wiki
What is Touhou Project?
Talk:
Touhou: Eastern
It is not an anime (though there are fan-made ones)
Canon: Games, CDs, Print Works
Fandom: Everything you can think of
Refer:
If you don’t have time, check out the video intro by This Exists (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KO2LMgtrSnc | Welcome to bullet hell - 200,000 subscriber celebration! - YouTube) and have a nice day. Otherwise, stick around!

From Kanji “弾幕” (Barrage)
lit. “bullet curtain” or “curtain fire”
Also referred to as bullet hell
A subgenre of Shoot’em Ups (shmups)
Slower but denser patterns
Most aren’t aimed at the player
“Danmaku”
Refer:
Show 52s-2:50
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2thTbsUP-c | Guide to Touhou - Episode 1: Introduction & Easy mode vs Normal Mode (for first clear). - YouTube

TH 16 is reasonably easy and is on Steam
HW: Runs on low-spec machines
OS: Win, Linux, and Mac (wine)
EN-patch on thpatch.net
More on moriyashrine.org and
en.touhouwiki.net
I wanna play. How should I start?
Say if you wanna dive right in yourself. Where should I start?
Each game is mostly independent so you can start anywhere. Some are more difficult than others.
My suggestion (transition into the slides)
Refer:
Show 52s-2:50
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2thTbsUP-c | Guide to Touhou - Episode 1: Introduction & Easy mode vs Normal Mode (for first clear). - YouTube

Start easy (literally)
You don’t have to start from the first game and beat every one.
Check comment section here for which one to choose
Danmaku is a sport. You can enjoy it without playing it.
Though more enjoyable if you give it a try
It’s Too Hard!
Ref:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iY_e-WoVIqU | Touhou 6 - The Awesome Power of Icicle Fall -Easy- - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2thTbsUP-c | Guide to Touhou - Episode 1: Introduction & Easy mode vs Normal Mode (for first clear). - YouTube


Sole Member of Team Shanghai Alice, Jun'ya Ota (ZUN)
Most of the entries in the franchise is made by one person, Jun’ya Ota, aka ZUN.
He chose “ZUN” coz arcade machines back then only allows for 3 chars and it’s somehow close to his name
If you go to wikipedia, he is listed as the single notable alumni of Tokyo Denki University. It’s the same school where Okabe Rintaro from Steins;Gate is from.
He has been making Touhou for longer than some of us are alive.

Games made almost by ZUN himself (programming, music, art, and dialog)
First game started dev. in 1995, released in 1996. Since then ZUN has made 20 Shooting games + 1 brick-out to this day.

Music CDs by ZUN
He also made 15 CDs, if we don’t coult supplementary discs for printworks and fighting game OSTs. Most of the CDs have its own storyline independent from the games

Fighting Games from Twilight Frontier 
ZUN collaborated on 6 fighting games, where ZUN provided the story, character design, and some music, and the game is made by Twilight Frontier

Printworks
Drawn by others but mostly written by ZUN
ZUN also wrote books and provided scripts for mangas.
By Wiki’s definition there are 10 series. We’ll touch on them later. 

Gensokyo (幻想郷 - The Land of Fantasy)
Cute girls shooting cute things
Originally referred to as The Eastern Country (東の国)
A forsaken refuge for Youkai
A remote place in Japan

The story happens in a remote land in Japan called Gensokyo, a haven for the forgotten (like Youkai).


Reimu Hakurei
Marisa Kirisame
In various games, girls solve “incidents”. These two are the “protagonists”, a shrine maiden and a witch
Refer:
The Main Duo
https://www.pixiv.net/member_illust.php?mode=medium&illust_id=52115131 | 【東方】「―ＨＥＲＯ―」/「英エイスト@お仕事募集中」的插画 [pixiv]

Asides from the two mentioned before, you can play as various other characters as well. This is all the playable character for the shooting games.
https://www.pixiv.net/member_illust.php?mode=medium&illust_id=70506717 | 【東方】「東方歴代自機之系譜」/「たれ」的插画 [pixiv]

The Rest (not quite)
A lot of “magical beings”
High-school Girl
Tsukumogami
Shinigami
Magician
Vampire
Kappa
Tengu
Ghost
Fairy
God
Nue
Oni
…
Almost all-female
Talk:
Gensokyo has a huge diversity. Each character has vastly different power, design, and lifespan.
I’m not going through every race, but that first one is not a joke. High-school Girl is a race according to canon.
As of Mar 16, 2019: 151 characters, 53 races (debatable)
Refer:
https://www.pixiv.net/member_illust.php?mode=medium&illust_id=44812121 | 【東方】「【６周年目の東方点描】」/「小唄」的插画 [pixiv]
“Youkai” in PMSS means “other Youkai that does not have a more specific race”. For this presentation, if it’s in yokai.com, it’s a Youkai.
Did not put the word “Youkai” on the slide because some of them are not.
Devil is another blanket term under Youkai in TH
A Japanese “god” is more like a deity embedded in nature/manifested due to belief.
14

PC-98 Era (1996-1998)
Talk:
After a brief overview, let’s go back in time and trace the history of the franchise.
Refer:
Based off Reimu Hakurei PC-98 (one-off only)

Talk:
Let's start with a bit of history. ZUN likes to play games. He also likes game music and wants to make some (coz he didn't know game making). When he got into college as a math major, he was bored and felt like making music for games, so he joined a circle called "Amusement Makers", but no one there made games so he made his own to promote his music. He chose PC-98 coz that was Japan's own version of PC, and it was the platform of choice for indie games (Windows did not have DirectX back then). He would then take minimal amount of credits and devote his spare time into making games. He never owned or used a computer before but learned C by himself. I am gonna show you the first game. Games made on PC-98 cannot run natively on modern PCs, but this footage was captured from genuine hardware.

He chose an-eastern themed game because he knows how to compose eastern music the best. The name "Touhou" literally means "eastern". (Though PC-98 has heavy influence of western theme, cue in Alice later). He chose a shrine maiden as the protagonist because he felt there weren't enough of them in games/anime. 
Refer:
He has been playing trumpet and keyboard as an amateur.
Namesake: "Touhou" sounds good. "Project" because he wants each game to be independent, and not a sequel to one another.

Pictured: 
2. 東方封魔録 ~ Story of Eastern Wonderland (1997)
3. 東方夢時空 ~ Phantasmagoria of Dimensional Dream (1997)
4. 東方幻想郷 ~ Lotus Land Story (1998)
5. 東方怪綺談 ~ Mystic Square (1998)
Talk:
The setting for this era is a bit vague and random. “Gensokyo” as we know was in its infancy. It is almost always referred to as The Eastern Country (東の国).
I would read a part:
Background story of Lotus Land Story:
　　　Hakurei Shrine, located somewhere in the mountains of a certain country in the east, was at peace. 
　　　The shrine maiden of the Hakurei Shrine, Reimu Hakurei, was also free. 
　　　Reimu:"Ahhh~, there's nothing (interesting) to do."
　　　As she said that, large numbers of monsters and such poured out towards the shrine all of a sudden. She got what she deserved.

Do note that PC-98 clashes with current canon so always refer to the newest work. Parts that do not are still canon.

Refer:
ZUN thought of giving up at during LLS, but persisted due to popularity
(according to https://en.touhouwiki.net/wiki/Mystic_Square/Music Dream Express)



From Kanji “同人”
like-minded people, independent creations (in contrast to corporate)
Started out as self-published magazines in literary societies
Expanded to anime, game, music, etc.
Works mostly distributed at events revolving around doujins
ComicMarket (Comiket) being the biggest one
Eventually went online as well, but still limited to Japan
Doujin
Based off Alice Margatoid

Taito and Seihou (1999-2002)
Talk:
We would deviate a bit and talk about something outside of Touhou that influenced Touhou as well.
Refer:
Based off Yuuka Kazami

Seihou Project by Amusement Makers
Talk:
Not to be out done by ZUN Senpai, members of Amusement Makers made an opposite version of Touhou
Seihou: West
Protagonist VIVIT: Maid battle robot powered by cactus fighting in the earth of future (kinda like Fallout?)
Refer:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mCAnqZUYXYA | Ignorant Stohory ☯ - Why Seihou Project helped shape modern Touhou - YouTube

Talk:
ZUN contributed music and art to the first two games, asked AM to include some TH chars, including Reimu and Marisa, with outfits that look suspicious similar to EoSD
Marisa has wings that look like Flandre’s BTW, just in pure white
Refer:
https://youtu.be/h8cy5Lcukic?t=453 | Seihou 1: Shuusou Gyoku - Extra Stage
https://youtu.be/h8cy5Lcukic?t=232 | Seihou 1: Shuusou Gyoku - Extra Stage

Talk:
ZUN contributed music and art to the first two games, asked AM to include some TH chars, including Yuuka with WINGS, Reimu and Marisa that look suspicious similar to EoSD
Refer:
Thumbnail of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QNmpzYsESiY  | Seihou 2 ~ Kioh Gyoku ~ Yuuka - YouTube

22

pbg helped with the engine for Embodiment of the Scarlet Devil, the first Touhou game on Windows
https://youtu.be/txh0_jdYzgw?t=154 | Touhou 6: Embodiment of the Scarlet Devil Playthrough [7] - Ending + Credits
https://github.com/pbghogehoge/ssg | pbghogehoge/ssg: 秋霜玉
https://github.com/pbghogehoge/kog | pbghogehoge/kog: 稀翁玉



23

ZUN at Taito
Talk:
Hidden cameo of Reimu, 2002
In 1999, ZUN graduated from college and started working at Taito - the same company that brought you space invaders
Worked on various games, including Graffiti Kingdom
ZUN pitched his idea of a shrine maiden-themed STG but was rejected
Frustrated, he decided to work on his own in his spare time, and eventually left Taito in early 2007, after another game in the works got cancelled
Refer:
https://touhou.fandom.com/wiki/Graffiti_Kingdom | Graffiti Kingdom | Touhou Wiki | FANDOM powered by Wikia
Works with Taito Corporation
International League Soccer (2000) (Known as Greatest Striker in Japan)
Magic Pengel (2002)
Bujingai (2003)
Graffiti Kingdom (2004)
EXIT (2005)

Rebirth of Gensokyo (2002-2007)
Based off Yukari Yakumo

ZUN applied to ComicMarket 61 (winter 2001)
for a CD he planned on...
and was rejected

He applied again and was accepted to Comiket 62 (summer 2002)
So he decided to make another game with the extra time
ZUN Returned to Doujin Scene
Talk:
After “goofing around” during the PC-98 era, while making games at Taito, ZUN decided to work on music by himself
Why reject: There are so many creators that Comiket has to do a lottery to pick applicants.

Talk:
To apply for Comiket you need a name for the circle
ZUN Soft sounds too generic now in ZUN’s opinion.
上海アリス幻楽団 Shanhai Arisu Gengakudan, lit. "Shanghai Alice Fantasy Band"
A mysterious mix between east and west
Refer:
Although announced after announcement of EoSD, he prbly only had music in mind at the time
27

Beginning of the Windows Era
Talk:
At CM 62, ZUN released a CD (left) and a game (right)
The story of DiPP is a reference to And Then There is None.
The game is a “Late 20th century style, 21st century shmup”
a parody of companies always trying to shove “next-gen” into the mouth of the consumers
nostalgia mixed with creating something new, but still simple at its core to have fun
Refer:
Trivia: Thumbnail of EoSD was printed with light colors to save ink

Episodic Incidents (TH6-9.5)
Talk:
Plot of each game is independent.
Games are mostly independent with "carefree" dialogs, but complexity of story is creeping, with more thoughts pouring into them.
The one in bottom left is made with collab of Twilight Frontier and is not done by ZUN
Refer:
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=1171 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Embodiment of Scarlet Devil marked the debut of Touhou on Windows. ZUN chose a western theme to catch ppl by surprise. It introduced "spell cards". It has Vampires, maid, and magicians, and JoJo reference
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=3317 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Perfect Cherry Blossom is a lot more Japanese, about a Ghost trying to revive a body under a cherry tree. Made more emphasis on Japanese poems (Waka).
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=3492 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Imperishable Night introduces lunarians. The story revolves around the legend of the bamboo cutter. Playables from previous game gathered to solve the incident (fake moon). Spell practice, deep backstory. Supposed to be the end of the trilogy, but ZUN continued TH due to popularity. Easy game but hard to get it working on modern OS.
https://youtu.be/SrZ5nvKZmN8?t=1634 | Touhou 7.5: Immaterial and Missing Power - Reimu
Arranges done by U2 + ZUN tracks. Art by Alphes
Fighting game made by Twilight Frontier (Tasofro). Danmaku + fighting
Endless party
Thumbnail of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KSH24X7nkrE | Touhou 9: Phantasmagoria of Flower View - Yuuka - YouTube
PoFV is like a fan service. Versus game just like PoDD. A solemn story with quite a bit of philosophical thoughts, about death, war, Death, Yama, and hell.
Cover https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7a86AzMcx7g | Touhou 9.5: Shoot the Bullet - Level 1: Wriggle - YouTube
Tengu paparazzi collecting news
Harder than mainline game, you don’t shoot bullets, but take pictures of the bullet. Your camera can cancel bullets.
29

Enriching the Lore
Talk:
ZUN conveyed the settings of Gensokyo more in depth with printworks
Some continues beyond 2007
THEY DON’T COVER PLOTS OF THE GAME! They complement the games instead.
Intriguing thoughts by a male spectator (Curiosities of Lotus Asia, novel)
Prot. Rinoske makes Reimu’s dress and gave Marisa her weapon (mini Hakero)
	If you wonder what do men do in GSK, now you know.
Collection of news in GSK (Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, fanbook-like)
Settings book by a resident of GSK (Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, settings book)
Cute fairies doing cute things (Eastern and Little Nature Deity, Strange and Bright Nature Deity, Oriental Sacred Place, Visionary Fairies in Shrine, manga)
GSK vs Lunarians (Silent Sinner in Blue, manga; Cage in Lunatic Runagate, novel; Inaba of the Moon and Inaba of the Earth, 4-Koma)
Refer:
Had ZUN not been invited to write, he might not consider the settings as deeply
There are multiple Sangetsusei series with different Eng names

A CD series (10 albums so far)
with continuous storyline independent of TH
	(but vague connections)
about two college girls
(Maribel Hearn and Renko Usami)
exploring the occult in the near future
A vehicle for ZUN to express more freely
The Secret Sealing Club
GFC is about them exploring a graveyard, turning tombstones to see the Netherworld
Blonde Hair: Maribel Hearn (Merry), see “gaps” in space, strongly reflecting Yukari
Brown Hair: Usami Renko, Super unified physics major, living GPS
One autumn night, two young female mediums are looking for an imaginary world.
An occult club from an age that knows not of Gensokyo.
Contrast GSK to a sterile future
	“graveyard of gods”

A forsaken refuge for Youkai, attracted human exorcists as well.
500 years ago: Youkai Expansion Project (Yukari Yakumo)
border between illusion and reality, attracting Youkai
1885 (Meiji 18): The Great Hakurei Barrier
	

Settings (Again)
Talk:
The setting for GSK only solidified after PMSS, that’s why I postponed talking about the setting in depth ahead of time.


Spell Card Rule (Bill for the Naming of Duels)
Duels between youkai threaten to destroy the small world of Gensokyo.
However, a lifestyle without duels will cause the youkai to lose their power.
Accordingly, I would like to permit such duels under the following contract.
理念
Principles
一つ、妖怪が異変を起こし易くする。
One: To make it easier for youkai to cause incidents.
一つ、人間が異変を解決し易くする。
Two: To make it easier for humans to resolve incidents.
一つ、完全な実力主義を否定する。
Three: To reject a system wherein only the strongest have the right to rule.
一つ、美しさと思念に勝る物は無し。
Four: That beauty and thoughtfulness stand above all.
Spell Card Rule is kinda a “retcon” as nothing mentions what spell card entails until PMSS
https://en.touhouwiki.net/wiki/Perfect_Memento_in_Strict_Sense/Draft_of_Spell_Card_Rules | Perfect Memento in Strict Sense/Draft of Spell Card Rules - Touhou Wiki - Characters, games, locations, and more
Danmaku is a sport
How to play: throw and dodge things
Competitive, but to a limit
You have to “spell” your attacks
Whoever creates incidents have to accept challenge until defeated

Yes. Touhou has lore. A lot of it, but underappreciated.
Inspiration from Japanese/Asian myth and folklore
boldly mixed with western mythology and sci-fi
Carefree atmosphere with a touch of serious undertone
	Human and Youkai
	Human vs Youkai
	Modern vs Retro
	Immortality
	...
“Gensokyo accepts everything. And that's a cruel, cruel thing.”


What to expect from the lore?
Underappreciation is partly ZUN’s own choice/fault as the game doesn’t leave a lot of room for dialogs.
https://en.touhouwiki.net/wiki/Immaterial_and_Missing_Power/Story/Yukari%27s_Script#Yukari_beats_someone | Immaterial and Missing Power/Story/Yukari's Script - Touhou Wiki - Characters, games, locations, and more


Religious War (2007-2013) 
Talk:

Refer:
Based off Sanae Kochiya
Shinto
	Dominant/native religion of Japan
	Deities rely on faith to exist 
	No more faith = cease to exist
Buddhism
	Trying to promote co-existence between humans and youkai
	A religion originally from India
	Spread out to East Asia, including Japan, and mingled with Shinto
	No gods/goddesses
	Cyclical theme of re-birth
	Birth with Shinto, death with Buddhism
Taoism
	Ancient Chinese religion
	No ‘gods/goddesses’
	Philosophical in nature
	Also like Buddhism, it has a series of teachings to abide
	Ultimate goal is immortality
	Taoists were largely absent from Gensokyo until the resurrection of Toyosatomimi no Miko

Continuous Story (TH 10-13.5)
Mountain of Faith (Shinto)
Subterranean Animism (Former Hell)
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=6402 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
TH 10 MoF: Moriya Shrine (based off real-world counter parts) moves into GSK
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=7719 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
TH 11 SA: Hot spring and evil spirits coming from underground. God of the shrine started an industrial revolution with nuclear fusion in hell
Fun fact: bosses in SA are ordered from the somewhat hated to the most hated

Continuous Story (TH 10-13.5)
Undefined Fantastic Object (Buddhism)
Ten Desires (Taoism)
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=9419 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
TH 12 UFO: UFOs showing up in GSK. Jet of hot water from fusion in SA sent a sealed vault and some sealed Youkai onto ground. The revived Youkai then went on to rescue their saint.
Homage to Taito’s 30th anniversary (2008)
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=10961 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
TH 13 TD: Divine spirits showing up in GSK. The revived saint built their temple on top of a “deceased” emperor who secretly practiced Taoism.


Continuous Story (TH 10-13.5)
TH 13.5 東方心綺楼 ～ Hopeless Masquerade (all)
Thumbnail of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rV_WxpA5PJY | Touhou 13.5: Hopeless Masquerade - Reimu Hakurei - YouTube
A sudden pessimism in the human village. Different factions swarm to gain popularity. In the end collectively resolved the incident
Hidden jab at modern politics.
First aerial fighting game

Sidelines (TH 10.5, 12.3, 12.5, 12.8) 
Thumbnails:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UxqseNiJuvg | Touhou 10.5: Scarlet Weather Rhapsody - Suika - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QsAXuVaQWc4 | Touhou 12.3: Hisoutensoku - Cirno - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pI_dJGdGcvk | Double Spoiler 9-7: Recollection "Vague Recollection of Kinkaku-ji" (Hatate) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hnNVwMY9NGw | Touhou 12.8: Great Fairy Wars - Route A-1 - YouTube
SWR: Earthquake and weird weather by the celestials, weather system
Soku: Investigate a mysterious giant. Expansion of SWR. Considered the peak of TH fighters by many fans
DS: Tengu paparazzi is out again. This time she has a rival.
GFW: Catfight between fairies. Harder than mainline coz “Fairies are weaker so patterns look harder”. You don’t shoot. You freeze bullets.
Technically the English part is only “Fairy Wars”, but the kanji has “大” (great) at the front so ppl more often refer to it as Great Fairy Wars

Youkai Revolt (2013-2014)
Previous incidents are not to overturn the society. From now on, things get serious…

Overturning Gensokyo (TH14, 14.3)
Double Dealing Character
Impossible Spell Card
(Technically started out at the extra stage of Ten Desires)
Talk:
GSK is a paradise for powerful Youkai, not for human, not for the weak.
A Youkai that looks and thinks like Ryūko Matoi wants to change that.
Thumbnails:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4m0RyMBmDWc | Touhou 14: Double Dealing Character - Stage 5 - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=heYhWPpIFno | Touhou 14.3: Impossible Spell Card - Day 10 - YouTube
41

The Lunarians Strike Back (2015-2018)
We are now about to introduce the most recent and ambitious arc.

Urban Legend Incident
TH 14.5 東方深秘録 ～ Urban Legend in Limbo
Talk:
We start with rumors (aka urban legends) spreading in GSK. Girls found that they can turn power of the rumor to their own. At the same time purple occult balls start to appear, and were “rumored” that whoever collected them all will have her wish granted. “The Holy Grail War” thus begins.
Turns out someone outside GSK wants to get in and she spreaded the balls. She dreamed of GSK as a kid, but looks like someone else is behind all this as well...

Thumbnails:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XJCAwB6FaVY | Touhou Shinpiroku ～ Urban Legend in Limbo: All Characters Last Word Collection - YouTube

GSK is a paradise for powerful Youkai, not for human, not for the weak.
A Youkai that looks and thinks like Ryūko Matoi wants to change that.
43

Urban Legend Incident (Continued)
TH 15 東方紺珠伝 ～ Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom
Talk:
So the story continues. Turns out lunarians wanted to move to GSK by displacing it.
How?
Spread rumor about the Apollo Hoax (TH ver: NASA saw a secret civilization on Moon and hid the face).
Use the occult ball to materialize that myth in GSK.
Lunar capital would displace GSK, wiping it out of existence.
Why?
They have been attacked by fairies
Why fairies?
	Someone had a beef with the lunarians and asked fairies for a favor.
Refer:
https://youtu.be/9eptIrkjwL8?t=3 | Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom Normal Spellcard 76 - "Fake Apollo" - YouTube

44

Return of the Sage
TH 16 東方天空璋 ～ Hidden Star in Four Seasons
Talk:
That was complicated. The next one is technically not in the urban legend arc but the boss would show up later.
One line plot: A sage wanted to show off, so she caused climate change by placing backdoors into fairies.

45

Perfect Possesion
TH 15.5 東方憑依華 ～ Antinomy of Common Flowers
Talk:
Girls start possessing each other. Turns out you have another self in the dream world. If they run around when you are awake you’re in trouble.
I have seen PAPERS about mechanisms of perfect possessions.
Refer:
https://youtu.be/8PqP356YVek?t=148 | [1.01] Touhou 15.5 - Antinomy of Common Flowers - Doremy Sweet - YouTube
46

Perfect Possesion (Aftermath)
TH 16.5 秘封ナイトメアダイアリー ～ Violet Detector
Talk:
One liner: a high-school girl can enter GSK while she dreams. She is stuck in the dream world with her dream self, and only one can win and get out.
I would personally not recommend you play it gameplay-wise. But it gives a glimpse at how perfect possesions work.
Refer:
https://youtu.be/8PqP356YVek?t=148 | [1.01] Touhou 15.5 - Antinomy of Common Flowers - Doremy Sweet - YouTube
47

Future of the Series
Talk:
So, what’s the future?

ZUN: Touhou Project Has Become My Lifework
Talk:
From what we can game from documents and interviews, ZUN thought of giving up at LLS and IN, but continued due to popularity. Now ZUN treats it as lifework.
Official side:
ZUN starts to catch trends. More mainstream campaigns in Japan (collab with Akihabara, orchestra concerts with JAGMO).
Lukewarm expansion to the rest of the world. Games are coming up on Steam (we’ll get to shortly)
But ultimately it’s the fans who keep the franchise alive, and after the break we will talk about the fandom.
Ref:
https://ch.nicovideo.jp/indies-game/blomaga/ar172115 | ＺＵＮ「『東方Project』は自分のライフワークみたいなものになっている」（代表作：『東方』シリーズ）:RPGアツマール:RPGアツマールch(RPGアツマール) - ニコニコチャンネル:ゲーム

Intermission (5 min.)
Based off Reimu Hakurei

The Fandom
small but very niche touhou fanbase both in the east and the west

majority in japan, concentrated around conventions

Comiket, a prominent Touhou convention
Comiket facts: 
-At least one day of the 3 days is dedicated specifically to Touhou 
-Up to couple thousand circles, about 10% of all circles at Comiket (compare Vocaloid and Kancolle at about 2%)

ZUN himself presents his maingames here, (e.g. Touhou 16.5 most recently) along with most of the big-name doujin circles

Comiket 52: he released his first game, Highly Responsive to Prayers


Comiket information map: an entire comiket day JUST for touhou, converged at the East Halls of the Tokyo Big Site

and all participating Touhou circles gather in the East Hall of Tokyo Big Sight (TBS) (point)

point on map


Reitaisai: another Japanese convention, unique for being Touhou exclusive -- pictured is Reitaisai 12 dealership stand for example
bit smaller than Comiket, but not by much -- still boasts massive crowds
typically annual convention, though smaller Autumn Reitaisai also held in recent years
notable event: reitaisai 8 cancelled because of 2011 fukushima earthquakes, turned into online convention called Air Reitaisai 8, kinda like Redditaisai

both comiket and reitaisai massive sources for touhou merch -- lots of smaller conventions listed on touhou wiki if interested

TRANSITION:
What about Touhou’s presence in the West? Truthfully, quite sporadic and depends



Touhou’s Western presence is … rather sporadic, to put it that way
Best bet is to look for a Touhou convention at an anime con, such as this one!
pictured: slideshow from Youmacon 2017’s touhou panel
biggest concentration of 2hu fans, great chance to mingle
Big chance you might see presenters again
Watch for the (relatively) uncommon Touhou cosplayer! They’ll appreciate your keen eyes :)
Most more than happy for photos
Pictured: Otakon 2017 -- evidently Cirno is best girl /s
oftentimes simply knowing 2hu is a great conversation starter -- make friends!
Merch? Hit up the dealership rooms
Pictured: Dealership room, Youmacon 2011
Finding 2hu Merch amongst an already small amount of imported merch → a needle in a haystack
Uncommon enough a dealer will know off the top of their head if they have 2hu or not; when in doubt ask
Plus side: most people aren’t looking for 2hu stuff so less competition
Also a matter of having a keen eye

TRANSITION: Can’t make it to conventions? THERE’S STILL HOPE!



Redditaisai: a free online Touhou convention held on the /r/touhou subreddit during the summer. (fan content itself depends on the content creator)

opportunity to create/get touhou stuff without having to make a pilgrimage to Comiket

first redditaisai was in 2016 and is growing every year -- signups are open now if you’re interested in making content!




Pictured: various Redditaisai submissions
lots of OC content, very characteristic of Western content creators
tends to be digital stuff (e.g. music, art)
very passionate about what they do, just like Japan doujin circles! :)

TRANSITION:
lots of different conventions with varying Touhou content, but ZUN himself isn’t nearly as prolific and is low-profile.
i.e. each of his convention visits are high-profile, especially his western visits.
[CHANGE SLIDE]

ZUN visits the US at Anime Expo 2016!
Discuss photo: ZUN taking pictures with fans at Anime Expo 2016 -- the few times he is out and about, he is friendly and talks easily with fans.

FIND SOMEONE WHO WAS THERE!

Shorten -> “AWA approached him in a way he appreciated … (ZUN) wants to be just some dude and have fun with other dudes and dudettes. Several cons have tried to get him before, but AWA respected this about him more than the rest.” (Kilg A. Mayan)

First visit was at Anime Weekly Atlanta 2013 as a special guest
chosen because he could go as a regular convention-goer, not as a celebrity.
just wants to have fun

second visit was at Anime Expo 2016 (pic above) with NIS America (Nippon Ichi SoftwarE)
did a panel + AMA [CUE NEXT SLIDE]


“What’s your favorite beer?” 
“Kirin beer.”
“Who’s your favorite touhous?”
“Reimu and Marisa.”
“What kinds of software instruments do you use to make the games?”
“I use the Roland SD-90. It’s old, but it’s something I still like to use.”
“Why are there no boys in your game series?”
“Because they simply get in the way.”
“Any change of old characters returning?”
“I won’t say no, but...”


Snippets from ZUN’s Q & A
Question: What is your favorite beer?
A: Kirin beer.
Question: Any chances of old characters returning?
A: I won’t say no, but…
Question: Why are there no boys in your game series?
A: Because they simply get in the way
Question:What kind of software instruments do you use to make the games?
ZUN: I use the Roland SD-90. It’s old, but it’s something I still like to use.

Question: What Touhous are your most favorite?
A: Reimu and Marisa
Question: Do you have a message to give to the fans?
ZUN: “I honestly didn’t think that there would be this many people since Touhou isn’t available in North America. I’ve seen a lot of people in Touhou cosplays, but for some reason most of them seem to be men. I’ll be here all day tomorrow and Sunday. I’ll be wandering around so please say hi. In the meantime, I’ll try to learn English.”

TRANSITION
now moving from general fandom activity to what content creators end up producing, i.e. [NEXT SLIDE]



What’s in a Touhou Doujin?
Doujin: (doujinshi for short) a self-published work of some kind by an author/group of authors in a limited production scope. (reference way back when)

most commonly released at conventions -- Comiket is in fact a doujinshi market called Comic Market

TRANSITION:
how is copyright addressed? [CUE NEXT SLIDE]


ZUN is generally chill with fan content, with these guidelines:
Contact him if you’re doing a commercial distribution.
Don’t reproduce the main game’s literal endings.
Don’t steal his own physical assets from the games.
See Touhou Wiki for more information
ZUN’s Rules for Content Providers
Fantasy Night, an iOS app notoriously removed for plagiarizing ZUN’s assets
Guidelines:
1:
Typical low-level doujin scale production (e.g. for Comiket) is OK and doesn’t need ZUN’s knowledge.
example: something like Kobuto Burst Battle (see later) needs ZUN’s knowledge
2:
Application of canon lore for the sake of producing derivative work obviously OK.
ZUN just doesn’t want the game endings carbon copied
3:
So long as you make your own assets/music/code/files etc. you’re good. 

reference Fantasy Night -- the first derivative work to violate ZUN’s rules

ZUN’s loose guidelines → massive room for creativity, hence massive Touhou doujin scene.


Touhou Music: big and diverse enough to get its own panel
-Touhou music is primary gateway for new fans -- acknowledge bad apple, the gateway drug
	- touhou music for literally every genre exists -- classical, J-pop, chiptune, eurobeat, house, alternative, you name it
	- result of having 2000+ touhou doujin circles :)
-Promotional Video: (PV) music video accompanying a music album to encourage purchases
- Mention holy crap quality of some vids
- Some were so good ppl thought Touhou was an anime
-To clarify, there is not an official anime, but some come pretty damn close
	-closest equivalents: Midsummer day dream, memories of phantasm

TRANSITION:
biggest question regarding touhou music is ...


Typically very hard as most music is Japan-release only
DoujinStyle Download Threads, www.moriyashrine.org, Google 
Very small Western release if lucky
Late 2018: doujin circles began global distribution
Buy your music through Google Play & iTunes!
See www.touhou-music.jp for a list of supported music
Where can I get Doujin Music?
Example Doujin Album Listing on Google Play
-Pirating:
	-We don’t officially endorse it, sometimes inevitable for extremely scarce music
	-Download threads specific to conventions → see DoujinStyle for example
	-moriyashrine.org might have some available stuff (also can download games)
	-1.75TB Lossless Music Collection circulating over the internet
	-online touhou radios also available if you dont like downloading
	
-Legal:
	-typically have to make long and expensive pilgrimage to Japan
	-can get really difficult to buy digitally from US
	-very small Western content creators (see Redditaisai as example)
	-check out musicians’ Bandcamp profile if they have one
UNTIL VERY RECENTLY
	- recent google play international release makes it easy
	-new wave of music just got published about a month ago just before original con ja nai

touhou music deserves its own panel to really do it justice, so montage instead (or not)


Tokyo Active NEETS
Orchestral, Jazz
A-ONE
Eurobeat
Alstroemeria Records
Vocal, House, Electronic
some good examples

Tokyo Active NEETS
notable for making really good orchestral arrangements
A-ONE
i love eurobeat
Alstromeria Records
fun fact: they made Bad Apple!!!

see more on Touhou Wiki!


ZUN’s game art is … unique, to aptly describe it
ZUN’s art notorious for being comically bad -- not unpresentable bad, but not very good either

pictured: ZUN’s art thru 2hu’s history

nevertheless it’s improved, and his artstyle has become an integral part of Touhou’s identity


fanart, however, can be much better

sources for fanart are everywhere, check out pixiv especially

LOTS of found fanart and OC on /r/touhou

can also find fanart in the form of posters at conventions
personal recommendation: buy OC posters instead of printed out pixiv posters


Touhou doujins exist for pretty much every manga type/genre
Fills in character details canon lore sometimes misses
Lots of yuri and ships (and hentai too)
Common Sources:
MangaDex
DynastyScans
Danbooru
Translation Sources:
Touhou Wiki
gensokyo.org
Fan Printworks/Manga
Example Doujin Cover
Romcom, Slice of Life, Drama, Violence, you name it -- someone’s probably made a Touhou doujin manga out of it

some doujins attempt to fill in character/lore details missed in the canon

others simply act out the mangaka’s fantasies, be it yuri, ecchi, hentai and so on

whatever scenario you can imagine someone’s probably made a doujin of that

common sources
specific mention for danbooru: good source for quick translations, based off “pools” of manga -- has lots of NSFW stuff tho so be careful
DynastyScans: majority of touhou manga, specializes in yuri if thats ur thing. also has NSFW stuff so be careful
MangaDex: not nearly as many doujins but on the rise. that said mangadex is the source for general manga


---

DS4’s weakest point – not much familiar with the doujinshi scene
Needs a list of a few noteworthy doujinshis (I included “Echoes in front of the temple” as an example)
ANGELTYPES – Inu-Sakuya
Haniwa's Store – Miko Miko Suika
Happy Flame Time for lulz
Stripe Pattern – Violent side of gensokyo




“Passion for your Sake” - Jiroo
Depression, Drama, Violence
“The Immortals who saw the Death of the Universe” - Alison
Comedy, Sci-Fi, Supernatural
“Her and her Dolls” - Aria
Comedy, Romance, Alice x Marisa
briefly showcase some recommendations --maybe the base plot?



Fangames: an extremely diverse doujin subgenre
Fangames are also numerous and in massive variety -- most released at conventions, and mods exist for the rest

most are japan-only releases and are even more scarce than music (absent pirating + google), though U.S. licensing is becoming prevalent

Most games overwhelmingly Windows-only, (tho Wine works for Mac + Linux) with very few games supporting multiple OSes. (e.g. Taisei Project) On the bright side, most are extremely light and should run fine in any decent comp

[refer to slide] 4 notable examples

Concaled the Conclusion -- showcases usage of the Danmakufu scripting language: a programming language that makes it easy to make danmaku games similar to ZUN’s
What would happen to Gensokyo if Reimu died?
Game itself was made free and available for download by author on GitHub
Touhou Puppet Dance Performance -- notable for being a Pokemon remake featuring Touhou characters
unfortunately not free and not legally available in US
Second version - Shard of Dreams - released last year including up to Touhou 15 content
Super Marisa World -- self explanatory
spawned a whole series just like the original
available on Steam, along with a bunch of other games (see later)
Embodiment of Scarlet Devil 3D: self-explanatory
surprisingly unique -- 3D danmaku usually doesnt exist
also unfortunately not free and legally abailable in US



TRANSITION
nearly all games for doujin-level scope only, but the doujin scene has expanded… [NEXT SLIDE]


Play, Doujin!: a cooperation between ZUN and Sony to release certain high-profile fangames on the Sony PlayStation Network to be playable on the PS4. 
(most require Japanese PSN account, with exceptions)

[Point to slide]
The left one, Touhou Kobuto V: Burst Battle is notable for a nintendo switch release (feel free to look this up if you have a switch)
The center game is ZUN and Twilight Frontier’s own release, Touhou 14.5. (Japan only)
The right one was the first game released through Play Doujin, Genso Ronder

TRANSITION:
Besides PS4 ZUN has also recently expanded into other areas, some of which are very close by → 


Welcome to Steam, ZUN! (And fangames galore)
Until very recently Touhou maingames was restricted essentially to Japan and to a very small niche in the West.
e.g. no official english translations for any official games
no western-release for any of the older games
All this changed with Touhou Tenkuushou: Hidden Star in Four Seasons -- the first Steam Release (pictured)
subsequent hype was so high HSiFS was ranked #1 on Steam for a short while
Touhou 15.5 and Touhou 16.5 followed after it (as well as future releases)
Touhou 15 and Touhou 14.3 published and available for purchase very recently
Skyrocheting Touhou fangame Steam releases thanks to ZUN’s recent blessing over scaled up fangame release (feel free to search up on Steam!)
Some games licensed by publishers (e.g. NISA) for bundled english translations
Exciting times right now for Touhou fans as the series becomes more mainstream


Miscellaneous (a.k.a. Everything Else)
even more variety in the “Miscellaneous category”

again comes down to having a keen eye at the convention

pictured:
life-size fumo touhou doll (really popular but expensive)
touhou keychains
Danmaku!!!! card game
yukkuri plushie (yep)
a ZUN figurine (also yep)
nendoroid touhou figurines of Patchoulli Marisa and alice


Resources
www.en.touhouwiki.net 
www.moriyashrine.org 
www.reddit.com/r/touhou
www.tinyurl.com/touhou199 
www.google.com  
ZUN’s Pages
Blog 1: https://kourindou.exblog.jp/
Blog 2: http://www16.big.or.jp/~zun/
YouTube: https://tinyurl.com/zunyoutube
Twitter Handle: @korindo
Additional Resources/Contact Info
Contact Info
Brian Lee: leebri@umich.edu
Yuchen Liu: lyuchen@umich.edu 
Find Us At
Great Lakes Touhou Discord: https://discord.gg/CA5bmEE
Touhou Subreddit Discord: https://discordapp.com/invite/MYcHUeh


Thanks for Coming! 
Based off Reimu Hakurei

Live demos, anyone?

DOUJIN GAMES
Why do we like creating Touhou doujin games?

Appendix
76

東方紅魔郷 ～ Embodiment of Scarlet Devil
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=1171 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Plot of each game is independent.
Embodiment of Scarlet Devil marked the debut of Touhou on Windows. ZUN chose a western theme to catch ppl by surprise. It introduced "spell cards". It has Vampires, maid, and magicians, and JoJo reference

東方妖々夢 ～ Perfect Cherry Blossom
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=3317 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Perfect Cherry Blossom is a lot more Japanese, about a Ghost trying to revive a body under a cherry tree. Made more emphasis on Japanese poems (Waka).


東方永夜抄 ～ Imperishable Night
https://youtu.be/pnVfknqnTuo?t=3492 | Touhou - Perfect Lunatic All Windows Main Games Compilation
Imperishable Night introduces lunarians. The story revolves around the legend of the bamboo cutter. Playables from previous game gathered to solve the incident (fake moon). Spell practice, deep backstory. Supposed to be the end of the trilogy, but ZUN continued TH due to popularity. Easy game but hard to get it working on modern OS.
Games are mostly independent with "carefree" dialogs, but complexity of story is creeping...

東方萃夢想 ～ Immaterial and Missing Power
https://youtu.be/SrZ5nvKZmN8?t=1634 | Touhou 7.5: Immaterial and Missing Power - Reimu
Fighting game made by Twilight Frontier (Tasofro). Danmaku + fighting
Endless party


東方花映塚 ～ Phantasmagoria of Flower View
Thumbnail of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KSH24X7nkrE | Touhou 9: Phantasmagoria of Flower View - Yuuka - YouTube
PoFV is like a fan service. Versus game just like PoDD. A solemn story with quite a bit of philosophical thoughts, about death, war, Death, Yama, and hell.

東方文花帖 ～ Shoot the Bullet
Cover https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7a86AzMcx7g | Touhou 9.5: Shoot the Bullet - Level 1: Wriggle - YouTube
Tengu paparazzi collecting news
Harder than mainline game, you don’t shoot bullets, but take pictures of the bullet. Your camera can cancel bullets.
